=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5431delta - what is new for perl v5.43.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.43.0 release and the 5.43.1
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.42.0, first read
L<perl5430delta>, which describes differences between 5.42.0 and 5.43.0.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<experimental> has been upgraded from version 0.035 to 0.036.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::ParseXS> has been upgraded from version 3.57 to 3.58.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Typemaps> has been upgraded from version 3.57 to 3.58.

=item *

L<File::Fetch> has been upgraded from version 1.04 to 1.08.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20250703 to 5.20250720.

=item *

L<PerlIO::via> has been upgraded from version 0.19 to 0.20.

=item *

L<Pod::Simple> has been upgraded from version 3.45 to 3.47.

=item *

L<Socket> has been upgraded from version 2.038 to 2.040.

=item *

L<Test::Harness> has been upgraded from version 3.50 to 3.52.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302210 to 1.302214.

=item *

L<Unicode::UCD> has been upgraded from version 0.81 to 0.82.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages. For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

=over 4

=item *

L<Use of uninitialized value%s|perldiag/"Use of uninitialized value%s">

This warning was issued in the reverse order (right-to-left) when both
operands of a binary operator are uninitialized values.  This is now
fixed to be consistent with evaluation order of operands.

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

The XS parser, L<ExtUtils::ParseXS>, has been extensively restructured
internally. Most of these changes shouldn't be visible externally, but
might affect XS code which was using invalid or unsupported syntax.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

When both operands of arithmetic operators (C<+>, C<->, etc.) are
L<overload>ed objects which have no method for that operator but have
a C<0+> method and the C<fallback> option set to TRUE,
perl will normally call the C<0+> method for the left operand first
and then call one for the right operand, i.e. in the same order
with operand evaluation order.
But if C<S<use integer;>> is in effect, the C<0+> methods used to be
called in wrong (reverse) order.

=back

=head1 Obituary

"WELL VOLUNTEERED!" echoed across conference rooms and IRC channels. Matt S. Trout's battle
cry that transformed reluctant volunteers into community leaders.

With profound sadness, we announce Matt's passing. Since the early 2000s, Matt
shaped Perl through sheer force of will: IRC operator, PAUSE administrator,
Shadowcat Systems co-founder, architect of DBIx::Class. His opinions came wrapped in
profanity and delivered at maximum volume. He suffered no fools and grew to
sometimes realize he should apologize. Yet this same abrasive exterior
protected fierce dedication to mentoring, developers he harangued into
volunteering now lead the community themselves. Matt's deliberately
mind-bending code pushed Perl forward. Every modern Perl developer touches his
legacy daily.

Well volunteered, Matt. Rest in peace.

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.43.1 represents approximately 2 weeks of development since Perl
5.43.0 and contains approximately 15,000 lines of changes across 410 files
from 21 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 12,000 lines of changes to 360 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.43.1:

Alexander Karelas, Chad Granum, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Chris Prather,
Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Dan Book, Daniel Dragan, Daniel Laügt, Dave Cross,
David Mitchell, James E Keenan, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Leon
Timmermans, Paul Evans, Philippe Bruhat (BooK), Richard Leach, Štěpán Němec,
TAKAI Kousuke, Thibault Duponchelle, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>. There may also be information at
L<https://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>. Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
