=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5434delta - what is new for perl v5.43.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.43.3 release and the 5.43.4
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.43.2, first read
L<perl5433delta>, which describes differences between 5.43.2 and 5.43.3.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<attributes> has been upgraded from version 0.36 to 0.37.

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.87 to 1.88.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.99 to 2.00.  Split POD and code
and add C<__END__>.  Avoids I/O and parsing 22KB of POD in C<use feature;>.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20250923 to 5.20251022.

=item *

L<SelectSaver> has been upgraded from version 1.02 to 1.03.

=item *

L<Time::Piece> has been upgraded from version 1.3701 to 1.38.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.46 to 1.47.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item AIX

Thread-safe locale handling has been turned off on all releases due to
apparent bugs in the underlying operating system support.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

The C<-CA> flag (or equivalently, the C<PERL_UNICODE=A> environment setting)
tells perl to treat command-line arguments as UTF-8 strings. (See L<perlrun>
for details.) However, this did not extend to the global variables implicitly
created by the C<-s> option:

 $ perl -CA -s -e 'printf "%vx\n", $_ for $foo, $ARGV[0]' -- -foo=é é
 c3.a9
 e9

Here C<$foo> would end up containing the two-byte UTF-8 representation of
"LATIN SMALL LETTER E WITH ACUTE", but C<$ARGV[0]> would contain a single
codepoint corresponding to U+00E9.

This has been fixed: If C<-CA> is in effect, options parsed by C<-s> are
treated as UTF-8, too. In the example above, C<$foo> and C<$ARGV[0]> now both
contain C<chr(0xE9)>. [L<GH #23377|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/23377>]

=item *

We have long claimed to support identifiers up to about 255 characters
long.  However this was actually true only for identifiers that
consisted of only ASCII characters.  The real upper limit was as few as
64 characters for identifiers written in other languages, for example,
Chinese or Osage.  Now an identifier in any language may contain at
least 255 characters.

=item *

Fixed parsing of array names starting with a digit in double-quotish
context under C<use utf8;>.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.43.4 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.43.3 and contains approximately 18,000 lines of changes across 170 files
from 21 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 7,500 lines of changes to 81 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.43.4:

Branislav Zahradník, Daniel Dragan, Elvin Aslanov, Eric Herman, Eugen
Konkov, James E Keenan, James Raspass, Karl Williamson, Lukas Mai, Masahiro
Iuchi, Paul Evans, Philippe Bruhat (BooK), Ricardo Signes, Richard Leach,
Samuel Smith, Sevan Janiyan, Sisyphus, Stan Ulbrych, Thibault Duponchelle,
Tom Wyant, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>. There may also be information at
L<https://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>. Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
